In this lesson, we're gonna talk about how
to work with numbers in Python.
We're going to be using the interactive
shell again so go to your Python
subdirectory.
Type Python to open the shell.
Again, you probably need to do that from
your 2.7.2 version of Python.
There's several different types of numbers
you can work with in Python.
The most common is the integer, such as
100 or the floating number, such as
3.14159.
Or you can also work with hexadecimal,
octal, and binary numbers in Python.
Python has the standard mathematical
operators, addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division.
Python also has modulus, so if you type 4
modulus 2, that returns the remainder
of dividing 4 by 2 so add 0 where 3 mod 2
returns 1.
Also has an exponent operator, so, if I
wanna
find 2 to the second power, I can type 2
star star, or asterisk asterisk, 2, to get
4,
or 100 to the 3rd power, which is 1
million.
When you're working with mixed number
types in
Python, such as integers and floating
points, Python
always converts up, so that 1 plus 2.2
will be equal to 3.2 rather than 3.
Because, here, Python will convert up from
integer to floating point, and
that's a great thing, cuz it'll keep you
from accidentally losing some data.
Another thing you keep in mind when
working in
Python is that the operators have an order
of precedence.
Think my dear Aunt Sally.
Multiplication, division, addition,
subtraction for
the most common of the operators.
So that 1 plus 2 times 3 is 7 instead of
9 because the multiplication, 2 times 3,
is performed before the addition.
If you want to change the order of
precedence then use parentheses like so to
give us 9 instead of 7 because
here we're forcing the addition before the
multiplication.
Python has some built-in mathematical
functions as well, such as
POW which performs power, taking 2 to the
3rd power.
Or Absolute Value, which will return the
absolute value of its argument.
A round which will round up or down its
argument either to
the next highest whole number or to the
next lowest whole number.
There are also some math functions that
you can import
such as square root and floor are just two
examples.
The literature will give you a full list
of all the mathematical functions.
And then finally, for performing random
number generation, you can import the
random
library and it's random function will
return a random number between 0 and 1.
Or, if you want to return a value within a
range you can type
random.random.int or randint and then the
range 1,100 and
it will provide a random integer in the
range from 1 to 100.
So, that's a very quick look at how to
work with numbers in Python.
I don't wanna spend too much time on that,
and we can spend forever.
Going over all of the features of of
numbers in Python,
there's lots of tutorials on the internet,
and lots of reference material.
If there's something that we didn't cover
in here that you are interested in
some of the other lessons will also bring
some points about numbers in Python.
But for now, we're going to move onto the
next lesson
where we are going to talk about working
with strings in Python